Patterns behind Chaos: Forecasting Data Movement
for Efficient Large-Scale MoE LLM Inference
Zhongkai Yu
UCSD
La Jolla, USA
zhy055@ucsd.edu
Yue Guan
UCSD
La Jolla, USA
y9guan@ucsd.edu
Zihao Yu
Indiana University Bloomington
Bloomington, USA
yuzih@iu.edu
Chenyang Zhou
Columbia University
New York, USA
cz2791@columbia.edu
Zhengding Hu
UCSD
La Jolla, USA
zhh068@ucsd.edu
Shuyi Pei
Samsung Semiconductor
San Jose, USA
shuyi.pei@samsung.com
Yangwook Kang
Samsung Semiconductor
San Jose, USA
yangwook.k@samsung.com
Yufei Ding
UCSD
La Jolla, USA
yufeiding@ucsd.edu
Po-An Tsai
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, USA
poant@nvidia.com
Abstract—Large-scale Mixture of Experts (MoE) Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs) have recently become the frontier open-
weight models, achieving remarkable model capability similar to
proprietary ones. But their random expert selection mechanism
introduces significant data movement overhead that becomes the
dominant bottleneck in multi-unit LLM serving systems.
To understand the patterns underlying this data movement, we
conduct comprehensive data-movement-centric profiling across
four state-of-the-art large-scale MoE models released in 2025
(200B-1000B) using over 24,000 requests spanning diverse work-
loads. We perform systematic analysis from both temporal and
spatial perspectives and distill six key insights to guide the design
of diverse serving systems. We verify these insights on both future
wafer-scale GPU architectures and existing GPU systems. On
wafer-scale GPUs, lightweight architectural modifications guided
by our insights yield a 6.6x average speedup across four 200B–
1000B models. On existing GPU systems, our insights drive the
design of a prefill-aware expert placement algorithm that achieves
up to 1.25x speedup on MoE computation. Our work presents
the first comprehensive data-centric analysis of large-scale MoE
models together with a concrete design study applying the learned
lessons. Our profiling traces are publicly available at https:
//huggingface.co/datasets/core12345/MoE expert selection trace.
Index Terms—Mixture of Experts, Large Language Model,
Wafer-Scale GPU, Profiling, LLM Serving System
I. INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated re-
markable capabilities across diverse domains, including pro-
gramming assistance [1], [2], translation [3], [4], and chat-
bots [5], [6]. Since the beginning of 2025, large-scale Mixture
of Experts (MoE) LLMs (200B+ model with 100+ experts)
have become the leading models for frontier LLMs [7] and
the most widely used open weight models.
Unlike dense LLMs that activate all model weights uni-
formly, MoE models dynamically route each token to only a
subset of experts, introducing substantial data movement over-
head. Such overhead already exceeds 50% of execution time
for small models (e.g., Mixtral 8x7B) on modest systems (2–4
GPUs), and it exacerbates further with larger models such as
0Accepted to ISCA 2026. This is the authors’ preprint version.
JetMoE
Mixtral8x7B Openmoe-34B
DBRX Jamba
Grok1
Qwen1.5-MoE
Mixtral8x22BDeepSeek-Coder-V2
Phi-3.5-MoE
DeepSeek V3Llama4-Mrv
Qwen3-235B
Kimi K2DeepSeek V4
GLM-5
8
40
200
1000
2023 2024 2025 2026
Parameter Size (B)
LLMs with limited 
prior study
LLMs with
no study
SOTA LLMs ﬁrst
proﬁled in our work
LLMs Released
after our work
Figure 1. MoE LLM models sizes and release dates. Bubble size indicates
the number of experts in each layer. Prior studies [13], [15]–[17] provide
limited analysis of smaller models from narrow perspectives, while our work
presents the first comprehensive analysis of multiple unstudied SOTA models.
DeepSeek V3 with 32×experts and 15×parameters deployed
on multi-node systems (32+ GPUs) [8], [9]. Moreover, this
scaling trend is accelerating: recent releases such as DeepSeek
V4 [10] and GLM-5 [11] continue to push the frontier, making
the associated data movement patterns ever more critical.
Yet as shown in Figure 1, no prior work has systematically
investigated these patterns at scale. Earlier studies [12]–[14]
confined themselves to profiling one or two small MoEs on
limited hardware, reporting surface-level observations without
system-level insights. As parameter sizes and expert counts
surge, new data movement patterns have emerged but remain
unexplored, leaving significant optimization opportunities on
the table.A comprehensive characterization of data move-
ment in SOTA MoE models therefore presents a fruitful
opportunity for better efficiency.
If data movement in MoE models were fully unpredictable,
it would present significant challenges for deployments on
multi-unit systems.From a temporal perspective, the ex-
plosive growth in expert combinations would make it im-
possible to prefetch, cache, or replicate experts in advance.
arXiv:2510.05497v5  [cs.DC]  12 May 2026
For example, large-scale MoE models like DeepSeek V3 have
C 8
256 = 4,426,165,368combinations in expert selection. When
served with host memory-offload systems, such unpredictabil-
ity would result in data movement like expert migrations be-
tween GPU and host, incurring substantial overhead, as inter-
unit communication becomes the primary bottleneck.From a
spatial perspective, if expert selection were truly random, it
would lead to severe workload imbalance across units. When
queries from diverse tasks are served concurrently, the number
of queries assigned to each expert would vary dramatically,
creating significant workload disparities. Consequently, most
units would remain idle and wait for heavily loaded units to
finish, resulting in poor hardware resource utilization.
Fortunately, as we later show in the paper,MoE expert
selections indeed have predictability that designers can
exploit to reduce data movement.To uncover the inher-
ent patterns in MoE models, we conduct a comprehensive
data-movement-centric profiling of four state-of-the-art MoE
models ranging from 235B to 1000B parameters released
in 2025. As highlighted in Figure 1, we profile DeepSeek
V3 [18], Llama4 Maverick [19], Qwen3-235B [20], and Kimi
K2 [21] across 24,000 requests involving varied tasks, topics,
and languages, which consumes>2000 GPU hours in total.
We then collect the expert selection trace of all layers and
tokens in each request to create an expert selection database
of over 150 GB JSON files. From these extensive traces, we
conduct a comprehensive analysis to uncover data movement
patterns from both temporal and spatial perspectives, making
our findingssystem-agnosticand applicable to various serving
architectures at any scale. We then distill six key insights that
serve as a solid foundation to understand MoE data movement
and directly inform future MoE LLM serving system design,
addressing critical questions that have remained unanswered
in the field, such as:Is there a correlation between previously
selected experts and those selected later? Are there discernible
rules underlying the observed expert selection skewness? Do
different tasks tend to activate different experts?Our work
represents the first systematic effort to characterize data move-
ment patterns at the scale of up-to 1000B model across a wide
range of tasks, providing actionable insights that can guide the
design of next-generation MoE serving systems.
To demonstrate the broad applicability of our insights, we
present case studies on both future and existing GPU systems.
On the architecture side, we observe that modern GPUs have
already adopted multi-chiplet designs due to single-die size
limitations [22]–[24] and are evolving toward wafer-scale
integration enabled by emerging on-wafer packaging technolo-
gies [25], [26]. Targeting this trend, we develop a two-level
data-placement-aware command processor and a hardware-
managed HBM scheme that jointly balance workload across
dies and reduce inter-die communication, achieving an average
6.6×speedup in MoE serving throughput on wafer-scale
GPUs. On existing multi-GPU systems, we observe that prefill-
stage expert selections can effectively predict decode-stage
behavior. Building on this observation, we propose prefill-
aware expert placement algorithms to reduce decode workload
0%20%40%60%80%100%
SGLang 16xH20SGLang 72xH100Default 256xH800Total Time
MoE All-to-AllMoE WeightAttn All ReduceAttn KV CacheAttn Weight
Figure 2. Latency breakdown for different data movement in DeepSeekV3
(4K sequence), modeled after various serving configurations [18], [27], [28].
imbalance, and achieve up to 1.25×speedup. Our main
contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We propose a comprehensive and systematic data-
movement-centric profiling across four latest, large-scale
MoE models released in 2025 between 235B and 1000B
to uncover the data movement patterns from both tempo-
ral and spatial perspectives.
•We distill six key insights for designing efficient MoE
serving systems based on our profiling and analysis,
providing actionable guidance that can inspire future
research in MoE serving systems.
•Leveraging these insights, we conduct case studies on
both future and existing GPU systems. On future wafer-
scale GPUs, we improve MoE throughput by 6.6×with
minor hardware modifications. On existing multi-GPU
systems, we achieve up to 1.25×speedup on an 8×H100.
•We collect over 70,000 expert selection traces across
multiple models and datasets, totaling over 150 GB in
JSON format, and have open-sourced all traces with our
multi-chiplet simulator to facilitate future research.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LLM and MoE Model Architecture
Most state-of-the-art LLMs adopt a decoder-only trans-
former architecture that follows a token-by-token auto-
regressive workflow [29]. As shown in Figure 3(a), after
users input queries, the serving process is divided into two
stages: the prefill stage and the decode stage. During the prefill
stage, all input tokens are processed simultaneously to generate
the first output token. The decode stage follows immediately,
where tokens are generated sequentially. The generated token
from each iteration is appended to the input sequence to
produce the next token in the following iteration.
The Mixture of Experts (MoE) mechanism is a state-of-the-
art approach to improve LLM performance and has become
prevalent among current frontier LLMs [30]. As shown in Fig-
ure 3(b), MoE-based LLMs replace the feed-forward network
(FFN) layers in traditional LLMs with MoE layers. In each
layer, multiple experts are deployed, and each request is routed
to a small subset of the most suitable experts based on a gating
mechanism. This innovation enables MoE models to scale
model parameters without incurring extra inference overhead,
since only a fraction of parameters are activated for each
request. However, this mechanism also introduces dynamic
randomness, since expert selection is unknown until gating
is completed, posing new challenges for serving systems.
D
C
D
D
C
C
B
B
B
A
A
A
OnceIYes
uponamit
aais Tell a story Who are you Is Apple red ...
Decode Stage
LLM Iter 1
...
Preﬁll Stage
LLM Iter 2
...
LLM Iter 3
...
Ob3: Preﬁll-decode LevelOb2: Token LevelOb1: Layer Level
 Temporal Relation
Attention
MoE
Layer
Spatial Relation
Ob4: Single ExpertOb5: Expert Pair
(a) MoE-LLM inference process and temporal relations(b) MoE operation and spatial Relation
LLM Iter 0Layer 0
...Layer 1
Layer N
Requests Expert 0
Expert 1
Expert 2
Expert 3
Expert 4
Expert 5
ABCD
MoE Operation Req Num
Gating
Figure 3. Inference process of MoE LLMs and the categorization method for our proposed data-centric profiling approach.
B. Prior MoE Serving Systems
The MoE mechanism constitutes the primary source of data
movement overhead in modern serving systems. As illustrated
in Figure 2, take DeepSeek V3 as an example, MoE-related
data movement (MoE All-to-All and MoE Weights) dominates
the overhead across different serving configurations, account-
ing for 60%-90% of total latency under 4K sequence length.
To address this , existing research has developed numerous
system-level solutions targeting different performance and
cost objectives. Edge systems like MoE-Lightning [31] and
CoServe [32] employ CPU memory offloading techniques
to address GPU memory capacity constraints, while cloud
systems such as Comet [9] and MegaScale-Infer [15] target
multi-GPU systems and address GPU-GPU communications
in MoE for higher throughput. Novel hardware architectures
like Duplex [33] explore processing-in-memory to accelerate
data movement in MoE LLMs.
However, these prior studies employ asystem-centric
methodology when optimizing for MoE LLMs. Namely, they
inherently focus on a specific platform and the corresponding
data movement patterns of MoE in such platform (e.g., CPU-
GPU, multi-GPU, ML accelerators). As a result, they propose
deployment-specific optimizations that may not generalize
across different serving platforms, and their insights are often
a slice of the overall inherent patterns in MoE LLMs.
In this work, we flip the process and adopt amodel-centric
strategy by conducting system-independent profiling to extract
system-agnosticinsights about MoE data movement patterns.
These insights are therefore broadly applicable across various
platforms, providing a foundation for optimization strategies
that transcend specific system implementations.
III. MOE PROFILING ANDSYSTEMINSIGHTS
In this section, we conduct a data-movement-centric pro-
filing of the expert selection behavior in four state-of-the-
art MoE models: Deepseek V3 (671B), Llama4-Maverick-
128E (402B), Qwen3-235B (235B), and Kimi K2 (1000B).
All results are averaged over more than 24,000 requests.
A. Categorization Methodology
As in Figure 3, we categorize MoE expert selection profiling
results into two categories:temporalandspatialrelations.
Figure 4. Cross-layer expert correlation. (a, b) Joint co-activation heatmaps
between layersNandN+1in DeepSeek-V3 and Qwen3. (c) Conditional
CDFP(e j |e i)for each layer’s top-1 expert.
Temporal relationscapture time-dependent expert selection
patterns where current choices inform future selections. These
patterns enablesingle-unit strategiesthat optimize data move-
ment for individual units through prefetching, caching, and
data migration. For example, in multi-chiplet GPU systems,
caching experts in local DRAM after remote fetches signifi-
cantly reduces inter-unit communication. To exploit temporal
predictability, we analyze expert selection at multiple time
scales shown in Figure 3(a):layer-level,token-level, and
prefill-decode-levelpatterns.
Spatial relationscapture how expert activations are dis-
tributed across compute units within a given time window. This
distributional information enablesmulti-unit strategiesthat
optimize expert placement and workload balancing across the
system, reducing data movement and preventing bottlenecks.
We classify spatial relations intosingle-expert activation im-
balanceandexpert-pair co-activation affinityas shown in
Figure 3(b), and investigate how task types influence these
patterns to inform system-level optimization.
B. Temporal Relations
As shown in Figure 3(a), we classify the temporal relations
of expert selection into three categories, arranged in order
of increasing time scale. At the layer level, we examine the
relationship between two adjacent model layers. At the token
level, we focus on the same model layer across two adjacent
tokens. At the stage level, we analyze the relationship between
the prefill stage and the decode stage.
1)Layer-Level Correlation:(Ob1)
As shown in Figure 4 (a) and (b), we present heatmaps for
Figure 5. Cross-token expert correlation. (a, b, c) Joint co-activation heatmaps between tokenstandt+1in DeepSeek-V3, Llama 4, and Qwen3. (d)
Conditional CDF for each layer’s top-1 expert: top 20% of the next-token expertalready covers most of probability mass.
Figure 6. Expert activation patterns remain consistent across prefill and
decode stages for both (a, b) cross-layer heatmap and (c, d) cross-token
heatmaps. Spearman’s ratio quantified in (e, f) shows a strong relation (≥0.7).
Deepseek and Qwen illustrating expert selection relationships
across adjacent layers. Each pixel in the heatmap displays the
conditional probability of selecting expertjin the next layer
given that expertiwas activated in the previous layer, with
bright colors indicating higher probabilities.
The heatmaps reveal clear cross-layer correlations with
white dots highlighting specific expert pairs with significantly
higher selection probabilities across adjacent layers. However,
correlation patterns vary across layers within the same model
and differ between models due to architectural variations. For
instance, patterns between layers 3-4 differ from those between
layers 30-31. Qwen3’s notably brighter heatmap indicates
stronger cross-layer correlations than Deepseek. Beyond the
white dots, there are also consistent bright vertical lines,
suggesting certain experts are frequently chosen regardless
of previous layer selections. These patterns indicate generally
popular experts, analyzed further in Sec. III-C1.
To quantify these relationships, we analyze the conditional
CDFP(e j |e i)in Figure 4(c): the top 20% of next-
layer candidates already cover 50%, 65%, 77%, and 56% of
the conditional probability mass for DeepSeek-V3, Qwen3,
Llama 4 1, and Kimi K2, respectively. This reveals strong,
model-dependent cross-layer correlations, with Llama4 show-
ing the strongest effect and Deepseek the weakest.
2)Token-Level Correlation:(Ob2)
We examine expert selection relations for the same layer
between adjacent tokens in Figure 5. Each pixel in the heatmap
displays the conditional probability of selecting expertjin the
next token given that expertiwas activated in the previous
token, with bright colors indicating higher probabilities.
Similar to layer-level patterns, cross-token heatmaps exhibit
white dots, bright vertical lines, and variation across layers and
models, indicating correlations between adjacent tokens. How-
ever, token-level relations reveal a common pattern appearing
across all models: the bright diagonal line that indicates the
tendency to select the same expert across adjacent tokens. This
diagonal pattern emerges predominantly in higher layers (17
and 43) but not in lower layers (1 and 3), regardless of models.
We apply the same conditional-CDF analysis to the token-
level relation. As shown in Figure 5(d), the top 20% of next-
token expert candidates cover 47%, 62%, 80%, and 53% of the
cumulative conditional probability in DeepSeek-V3, Qwen3,
Llama 4, and Kimi K2, respectively, averaged across all MoE
layers. The correlation is again strongest in Llama 4 and
weakest in DeepSeek-V3.
3)Prefill-Decode-Level Correlation:(Ob3)
Building on the layer-level and token-level relations, we ob-
serve notable similarities in expert selection patterns between
prefill and decode stages. Comparing heatmaps across stages
in Figure 6(a)(b)(c)(d), we find similar distributions of bright
dots, indicating that expert pair heatmap during prefill and
decode shares similarities. This cross-stage consistency sug-
gests us that the prefill-collected information can guide initial
decode steps until sufficient decode data accumulates.
To quantify this similarity, we compute Spearman’s ratio
(ρ) across all model layers, comparing prefill and decode
heatmaps. Spearman’s Ratioρmeasures monotonic relation-
ships between variables, ranging from−1(perfect negative
correlation) to1(perfect positive correlation). Generally,|ρ|>
1Llama 4 inserts dense FFN layers between MoE layers, so we pair adjacent
MoE layers (NandN+2).
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
DS Llama Qwen Kimi
0 45 90
Spaerman's Ratio
Layer 
Frequency of
Each Expert
Overlap Rate (%)(b) PD Top Experts Overlap (Qwen3)(c) PD Expert Freq SimilarityLayer 
(a) Qwen3 Preﬁll-Decode Expert Selction Freq (Layer66)
PD fully irrelevant Baselines
Figure 7. (a) Expert frequency distributions between prefill and decode stages
exhibit similarity. (b) The most popular experts in the two stages overlap
substantially. (c) All models show a high Spearman correlation between prefill
and decode expert frequencies.
0.7indicates strong correlation,0.4<|ρ| ≤0.7indicates
moderate correlation, and|ρ| ≤0.4suggests weak correla-
tion [34]. The results in Figure 6(e)(f) show that most layers
demonstrate strong correlation, while a few show moderate
correlation. This makes it possible to predict decode-stage
expert selection with prefill-stage data.
Beyond expert-pair heatmaps, we also identify prefill-to-
decode correlation at the single-expert frequency level. As
shown in Figure 7(a), the frequency distributions of prefill
and decode stages are substantially similar, though some
discrepancies exist among low-frequency experts. To examine
the most popular experts, we report the overlap rate of top
experts between stages in Figure 7(b): the top-5 prefill experts
cover around 60% of the top-5 decode experts, rising to 75%
and 90% for top-10 and top-20, respectively. This indicates
that prefill information can help predict the hottest decode
experts. The cross-model Spearman correlation in Figure 7(c)
confirms this relationship holds across all four models.
4)System Insights from Temporal Relation:The observed
temporal relations in expert selection motivate us to design
fine-grained, dynamic strategies on every single unit to reduce
data movement. For example, when expert weights are read
from remote memory, such as remote DRAM in multi-chiplet
systems, or CXL extension memory in memory-disaggregated
systems, caching, migration, and prefetching strategies can be
deployed to reduce data movement.
★Insight 1: Prefill-data-driven prediction (Ob3 ).Lever-
age the expert selection trace from the prefill stage to
predict expert selection during the decoding stage.
Empirical analysis shows that expert selection patterns
during prefill exhibit strong similarity to those during decode.
Thus, expert selection information collected in the prefill phase
can serve as a valuable reference for predicting decode-phase
selections, particularly at the beginning of decoding when only
a few tokens have been generated and historical context is
scarce. Our section VI demonstrates how prefill information
can guide expert placement during decode. This is especially
relevant in modern PD-disaggregated serving systems, where
Figure 8. Single-expert spatial relation analysis of Llama4 layer 7 shows:
(a) non-uniform expert activation distribution; (b) expert selection strongly
correlates with task type; (c) expert activation patterns shift significantly when
language changes while content remains identical.
the prefill and decode stages execute on separate machines.
★Insight 2: Cross-hierarchy memory management
(Ob1, Ob2 ).Token- and layer-level temporal relations
enable dynamic expert prefetching and caching across
memory hierarchies.
Layer-level and token-level temporal relations are similar in
definition but differ in reuse distance, making them suitable for
different levels of the memory hierarchy. Layer-level relations
exhibit short reuse distances because consecutive MoE layers
execute in immediate succession, while token-level relations
incur longer reuse distances because a new token is generated
only after traversing all layers.
This maps naturally onto the multi-level memory hierarchies
in modern serving systems. For example, in multi-chiplet
architectures, each die contains both an LLC and local DRAM,
forming a two-tier hierarchy. The faster but smaller LLC is
well-suited to managing experts with short reuse distances
(layer-level), while the larger local DRAM accommodates
experts with longer reuse distances (token-level). Accordingly,
we can leverage layer-level relations for LLC management and
token-level relations for DRAM management.
This principle generalizes to other system configurations:
CXL-based systems with local DRAM and remote CXL mem-
ory, SSD offloading systems with DRAM and flash storage,
and PIM systems with local and remote DRAM dies. In each
case, layer-level relations guide the faster memory tier and
token-level relations guide the slower one.
C. Spatial Relation
As shown in Figure 3(b), we analyze spatial patterns in
expert selection for both single-expert activation imbalance
and expert pair co-activation affinity. For single experts, we
examine statistical skewness and the factors affecting each
expert’s activation. For expert pairs, we analyze co-activation
properties across all two-expert combinations.
1)Single Expert Activation Imbalance:(Ob4)
We examine expert selection frequency at each layer, present-
ing results for layer 7 of Llama4 in Figure 8. We observe
pronounced skewness where a subset of experts is activated
over 16 times more frequently than average. This workload
imbalance suggests system designs should duplicate or decen-
tralize frequently used experts.
To investigate selection patterns across different tasks, we
analyze all 57 MMLU subjects spanning diverse fields, includ-
ing biology, history, and math, etc [35]. Figure 8(b) shows
the top 10 most popular experts for each subject. Horizontal
bright lines indicate certain experts are consistently activated
regardless of subject, while remaining popular experts vary
significantly between subjects, demonstrating both overlap and
distinction in task-based expert selection.
We further examine task impact using the Chinese version
of MMLU in MMLU Pro [36] with identical questions but
different languages. Figure 8(c) reveals distinctly different
patterns: although 5-6 experts remain popular across subjects,
only two overlap with English MMLU’s most frequently
selected experts. This confirms that task characteristics, includ-
ing language, significantly influence expert selection, enabling
task-aware serving systems that optimize expert distribution to
balance workloads and reduce data movement.
2)Expert Pair Co-activation Affinify:(Ob5)
Beyond single expert patterns, we observe spatial relations for
expert pairs where certain experts are more likely to be co-
activated. We present co-activation heatmaps in Figure 9(a)(b),
where both axes indicate expert IDs. Each pixel represents
an expert pair with values showing co-activation frequency
normalized by theoretical random selection probability:p=
2
n(n−1), wherenis the number of experts.
Bright dots appear with probabilities 20-40 times higher
than theoretical values, indicating strong co-activation ten-
dencies. All heatmaps exhibit central symmetry since expert
pair(i, j)equals(j, i). In Deepseek’s heatmap Figure 9(a),
frequently activated pairs lie between red lines forming bright
squares, reflecting Deepseek’s routing restriction where tokens
are routed only to adjacent nodes to reduce communication
overhead. This suggests the potential of separating co-activated
expert pairs to balance workload.
We quantify this relation by in Figure 9(c). The top 10% of
expert pairs account for 60-80% of total activations, indicating
strong skewness. This suggests the potential for separating
co-activated expert pairs to balance the workload. We only
analyze Deepseek and Qwen since Llama selects one expert
per MoE layer, eliminating co-activation relations.
3)System Insights from Spatial Relation:Spatial Relation
enables coarse-grained, static strategies to address workload
imbalance across the system. These strategies could be applied
at system startup or during periodic redistribution (e.g., every
10 minutes) through appropriate task distribution.
★Insight 3: Expert-placement-aware workload distribu-
tion (Ob4 , Ob5 ).Employ expert placement information to
design workload-balanced task distribution strategies.
Expert placement in serving systems can change dynam-
Figure 9. Expert-pair co-activation affinity. (a)(b) Heatmaps for DeepSeek
and Qwen. (c) CDF of co-activated expert pairs across all layers: a small
fraction of expert pairs accounts for the majority of co-activations.
ically due to expert migration strategies. Therefore, when
allocating workload to system units, expert placement should
be considered for better workload balance. Besides, the design
space for task allocation could be enlarged with emerging
new systems. Traditional multi-GPU systems tend to allocate
experts to local GPUs to avoid cross-unit communication.
However, in multi-chiplet GPUs, we can consider allocating
tasks to remote dies for better workload balance as inter-unit
communication becomes faster.
★Insight 4: Popular expert decentralization (Ob4 ).Du-
plicate or decentralize frequently used experts to balance
workloads.
Expert skewness causes workload imbalance and suboptimal
resource utilization. Duplicating popular experts across multi-
ple compute units distributes load more evenly. Additionally,
avoiding co-location of highly popular experts in the same unit
further enhances workload balance.
★Insight 5: Expert-pair separation (Ob5 ).Separate fre-
quently co-activated expert pairs to maximize parallelism.
Certain experts are frequently activated simultaneously,
exhibiting strong co-activation patterns. Assigning these co-
activated expert pairs to different compute units maximizes
hardware parallelism and prevents workload concentration
on specific units. However, separation also introduces cross-
unit communication overhead. The effectiveness depends on
system topology and batch size, requiring careful trade-off
between parallelism benefits and communication costs.
★Insight 6: Workload-aware serving system (Ob4 ).
Leverage the workload information, like task type and
language, to make expert migration prior to serving.
Hot experts vary by task and language. English queries, for
instance, activate different expert subsets than Chinese queries.
Providing task metadata during serving enables proactive
expert placement: when workloads are predominantly English,
systems can pre-duplicate or reassign English-relevant experts,
reducing communication and balancing loads. This task-to-
expert mapping requires only one-time offline profiling per
model and can be reused throughout deployment, making the
approach practical and efficient.
IV. CASESTUDY1: WAFER-SCALEGPU ARCHITECTURE
DESIGN FORMOE SERVING
In this section, we adopt future GPU architecture design as a
use case to validate our proposed insights. We follow Insight 3
to design a task allocation algorithm and leverage the temporal
relation insights (Insight 1 and Insight 2) to build a data-driven
predictor. We also make slight architectural modifications to
support the proposed strategies.
A. Trend of Future GPU Architecture
GPU vendors are increasingly adopting multi-chiplet ar-
chitectures to overcome single-die performance limitations.
As Moore’s Law approaches its limits [37] and single-die
size remains constrained by photomask dimensions (800-
1,000 mm 2), advanced packaging technologies like TSMC’s
CoWoS [38], Samsung’s X-Cube [39], and Intel’s EMIB [40]
enable multiple chiplets within a single package. Leading
vendors have adopted such designs: AMD’s MI300 [22] in-
tegrates eight compute chiplets, NVIDIA’s Blackwell features
two chiplets [24], and upcoming Rubin expects four [41].
This trend is evolving toward wafer-scale systems [42].
TSMC’s System-on-Wafer (SoW) technology accommodates
up to 24 compute dies and 96 HBM dies on a single wafer,
exceeding 200,000 mm 2 [43]. As shown in Figure 10(a), a
typical wafer-scale multi-chiplet GPU consists of multiple
units, each containing a GPU die and several HBM dies
interconnected in a mesh topology. Such systems contain
over 3 TB of HBM and PFLOPS-level computing power,
supporting extremely large models and batch sizes.
The TSMC SoW technology shown in Figure 10(b) con-
nects each GPU die to local HBM dies through local-silicon
interconnects (LSI) [44], with adjacent GPU dies communicat-
ing via LSI vertically or XSR SerDes links horizontally. Al-
though LSI and SerDes both provide terabit-level bandwidth,
inter-GPU-die communication remains the primary bottleneck.
Remote data access requires multiple hops across die-to-die
links, resulting in high latency. Simultaneous remote HBM
access by multiple dies creates bandwidth contention and
traffic congestion, further degrading performance.
B. Background on Wafer-scale GPU Programming model
The programming model of future wafer-scale chip remains
an open question, but two major candidates have emerged: the
multi-GPU-like and the single-GPU-like programming model.
Multi-GPU-like programming model.WSC-LLM [26]
and MoEntwine [45] adopt a multi-GPU-like programming
model that exposes the entire wafer as a multi-GPU system.
Programmers can program the wafer similarly to a conven-
tional multi-GPU system, with the key difference being the
2D mesh topology where each die communicates directly
only with its neighbors. While this approach offers fine-
grained control over individual dies and enables flexible soft-
ware strategies, it diverges from current industry trends. For
instance, although Blackwell and Rubin both integrate two
compute dies, NVIDIA exposes no toolchain for fine-grained
die-level control. Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) can partition a
multi-die GPU into independent GPU instances, making each
die act independently, but the high-speed D2D link is disabled
in this mode [46], forcing inter-die communication through the
10-100×slower NVLink or PCIe and negating the benefit of
multi-die packaging. Therefore, extending this programming
model to wafer-scale GPUs would require substantial archi-
tectural changes to current GPU designs, including redesign-
ing the D2D/C2C controller workflow and distributed LLC
structure, making it infeasible in the near term.
Single-GPU-like programming model.HDPAT [47], Hec-
ton [48], and our work adopt a single-GPU-like programming
model that exposes the entire wafer as a unified GPU, fully
abstracting the multi-die topology and data placement from
software so that the programming experience is identical to
that of a monolithic GPU. We adopt this model for two key
reasons. First, it aligns with commercial multi-chiplet GPUs
such as Blackwell and Rubin, ensuring practical industry
relevance. Second, it eliminates the programming complexity
of explicit inter-die communication management through li-
braries such as NCCL or NVSHMEM. However, this program-
ming simplicity shifts the optimization burden entirely to the
hardware. Given the inherently distributed architecture, local
versus remote data access costs vary by up to 15×, yet the
abstraction prevents programmers from controlling cross-die
data movement. Consequently, architecture-level optimizations
become critical to achieve high hardware utilization.
C. Challenges of serving MoE with future GPUs
Unlike current multi-GPU systems, wafer-scale GPUs can
fit entire MoE models on a single chip and support batch sizes
over 10,000. However, current GPU architectures introduce
two key limitations for such large-scale chips.
Simplistic Task Allocation.Current GPUs integrate a CPU
in their SoC to serve as a command processor and allocate
tasks to all SMs. However, the traditional command processors
treat all SMs equally, ignoring their physical locations and data
placement [49], [50]. This oblivious task-to-SM assignment
generates excessive D2D traffic and ignores MoE expert
selection skewness, leading to poor utilization when most dies
remain idle while others become overloaded.
Inadequate Local HBM Management.Current GPUs treat
all HBM dies as uniform memory space, but wafer-scale GPUs
connect each compute die directly to local HBM, where access
is significantly faster than a remote HBM. Frequently accessed
experts in remote HBM could be cached locally to minimize
D2D traffic, but current GPUs do not distinguish between local
and remote HBM and therefore generate unnecessary traffic.
Global CP Memory
Expertcp_enIs_local
Prediction Table
0 1 11 0 0
255 1 0
...
...
...
(a) Architecture of Wafer-Scale GPU (c) Data in Global CP
Global CP
Wafer-Scale Multi-Chiplet GPU
(b) System-on-Wafer (SoW) Technology
HBMGPU Die
LSI
GPU DieHBMHBM
RDL
SerDes
TIV
RDL
LSI UCIE
Ctrl
NoC
LLC PDU
D2D Ctrl
...
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
ATU
GPU Die
Data
Mem Ctrl
SM SMLocal CP
Cross-token Heatmap
Expert Distribution Table
ExpertInit DieDistribution
0 0 1100...0
1 0 0111...0
255 24 0000...1
...
...
...
Global CP
HBM Local CP
SMHBM HBM
HBM
Unit
2
3
SM
MoE Kernel
1
4
D2D Ctrl
Local CP
Figure 10. (a) Wafer-scale multi-chiplet GPU architecture with additional units highlighted in orange. (b) SoW (System-on-Wafer) technology structure. (c)
Data format in the Global Command Processor for our proposed task distribution strategy.
D. Motivation and Insights
To address these challenges, we propose two strategies with
architectural support. First, based on Insight 3 that identifies
the need for expert-placement-aware task distribution, we pro-
pose an intelligent task allocation algorithm with a multi-level,
data-placement-aware command processor architecture. This
approach considers expert placement and selection skewness
across dies, enabling dynamic task allocation that minimizes
D2D traffic while balancing workload.
Second, leveraging Insight 1 and Insight 2 that reveal
the predictability behind expert selection across differ-
ent timescales, we introduce a data-driven predictor with
hardware-managed HBM architecture. Local HBM caches fre-
quently accessed experts from remote dies, while a lightweight
predictor analyzes selection patterns to estimate future needs,
caching predicted experts locally to reduce D2D traffic.
To implement these two strategies under a single-GPU-
like programming model, we a few architectural extensions to
the GPU architecture. If future programming models evolve
toward multi-GPU-like abstractions with finer-grained control
over each die, these strategies could alternatively be realized
at the system level without any architectural modification.
E. Architecture Design
1) Architecture Overview:To support our proposed predic-
tor and task allocation algorithm, we implement two archi-
tectural modifications with minimal overhead, as illustrated in
Figure 10(a). These changes, highlighted in orange, consist of
an enhanced Command Processor structure and an extended
D2D controller design.
First, we redesign the Command Processor (CP) with a two-
level hierarchical structure: a Global CP at the wafer level and
Local CPs within each die. The Global CP maintains system-
wide expert selection and placement information for intelligent
resource management. Second, we extend the D2D controller
with an Address Translation Unit (ATU) and a Prediction Unit
(PDU). The ATU translates remote HBM addresses to local
addresses when remote data is duplicated, while the PDU
identifies important remote data requiring duplication. These
enable autonomous caching of remote data in local HBM
and intelligent redirection of data requests, reducing inter-die
communication overhead.
2) Key Data Structures:There are two key data structures:
Global CP data and the PDU prediction table.
Global CP Data Structures: As shown in Figure 10(c), the
Global CP maintains two structures. The expert distribution ta-
ble stores each expert’s initial die ID and distribution status as
ann-bit binary code, where each bit indicates expert presence
on the corresponding die. The cross-token heatmap records
expert activation patterns over time, providing historical data
for prediction generation.
PDU Prediction Table: Each PDU stores a prediction table
with two key fields per expert: the cp en bit indicating whether
the expert should be cached locally (calculated by Global
CP and transferred to each die), and the is local bit tracking
whether the expert is already cached in local HBM.
3) Workflow During Kernel Launch:When a new kernel
launches ( 1 ), the Global CP runs our task allocation algorithm
to split the MoE kernel into per-die sub-kernels and executes
the predictor to generate duplication guidance (cp en field is
PDU). The Global CP then sends sub-kernels and prediction
information to local CPs ( 2 ). Each local CP allocates tasks
to its SMs ( 3 ) and configures the prediction table in the D2D
controller for local HBM management ( 4 ). After computa-
tion, local CPs collect expert duplication statistics and send
them to Global CP to update expert distribution information.
4) Dataflow for Remote Data Access:We integrate ATU
and PDU into the D2D controller to support hardware-
managed HBM by modifying the remote data access flow.
With these two units, our architecture automatically duplicates
important remote data in local HBM, with green lines repre-
senting non-duplicated data reads and blue lines representing
duplicated data reads, as shown in Figure 10(a).
Remote Data Read (Non-duplicated): When an SM reads re-
mote data not in local HBM ( 1 ), the D2D controller routes
the request conventionally ( 2 ). Upon return, the PDU checks
the Prediction Table to make a duplication decision and sends
data to the SM regardless of the decision ( 3 ). If duplication
is required, the PDU writes to LLC and local HBM ( 4 , 5 ),
Algorithm 1:Task Allocation Algorithm
Input:expert reqs dict,expert die map
Output:allo plan
1Initializethe workload of each die:load per die;
2Sort(expert reqs dict, byreq numascending);
3for(expert id, req num)inexpert reqs dictdo
4candi list←GenCandidateList(expert id,dis= 1);
5candi list←Sort(candi list,i7→load per die[i])
whilereq num >0do
6costs of dies←CostModel(candi list);
7target die←Argmin(costs of dies);
8allo plan.append([expert id,target die,req blk]);
9Update(load per die);
10req num←req num−req blk;
11allo plan←MergeTasks(allo plan);
12returnallo plan;
13FunctionGenCandidateList(expert id,dis):
14local die list=expert die map[expert id];
15remote die list=FindNearDies(local die list,dis);
16returnlocal die list+remote die list;
updates the address into ATU, and sets the is local bit in
PDU’s Prediction Table to 1.
Local Data Read (Duplicated): When an SM reads remote
data already cached in local HBM ( 1 ), the ATU translates
the remote address to a local address and redirects the request
to LLC ( 2 ). The LLC and memory controller then retrieve
data and send it back to the SM( 3 , 4 ).
5) Algorithm Design:This subsection presents our task
allocation algorithm and data-driven predictor, both imple-
mented by the global CP.
Task Allocation Algorithm: Since accurate task distribution is
NP-hard, we propose two heuristic mechanisms: a candidate
mechanism that reduces the number of dies to consider and
a block-granularity distribution mechanism that searches for
approximate solutions among candidates.
This algorithm splits MoE kernel computation into sub-
tasks for individual dies based on expert selection and dis-
tribution information. As shown in algorithm 1, the input
expert reqs dictcontains the number of requests belonging
to each expert, whileexpert die mapprovides dynamic
expert distribution information from the Expert Distribution
Table in Figure 10(c), indicating where each expert is stored.
The algorithm iterates through all experts to generate al-
location plans. For each expert, it creates a candidate die
list including dies storing expert weights and their adjacent
dies (shown as green and red in Figure 11(a)). We sort
candidates by workload and limit the list tomax splitnum
dies, determined by the expert’s request count (line 3-5).
Requests are distributed to candidate dies in blocks of size
50 to balance efficiency and accuracy (line 6-11). For each
block, the algorithm selects the optimal die using our cost
model, which considers DRAM access, computation, and die-
to-die communication. Finally, we merge blocks allocated to
the same die to generate the final allocation plan (line 12).
Data-Driven Predictor: Our predictor algorithm, implemented
by the global CP, uses current MoE kernel expert selection
information to predict popular experts for the next token on
SelectedExperts forCurrentToken:(1, 4)
Cross-Token Heatmap
Previous Token ExpertPopularExperts toDuplicateLocally:(2, 4, 6)
1
3
(a) Task Allocation Algorithm (b) Data-Driven Predictor
Find Top n Experts
Next Token Expert
2
0 7
7
3 2 4
8 7 5
1 0 6
9
Local Die Remote Die
Final Candidate Dies
Wafer-Scale GPU
Figure 11. Proposed task allocation algorithm and data-driven predictor.
each die. This prediction result is transferred to local CPs
and configured in each die’s PDU to guide hardware-managed
local HBM. As shown by the red shadow in Figure 11(b),
we first identify corresponding rows from the heatmap based
on current expert selection ( 1 ), then select the topnexperts
from each row ( 2 ) and identify corresponding experts for the
next token as prediction results, denoted by the green shadow
( 3 ). In this example, a die computes experts 1 and 4 during
the current MoE kernel and we predict experts 2, 4, and 6
will be used next. Since this die only reads experts 1 and 4
currently, we duplicate only expert 4 in its local DRAM.
V. EVALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
Methodology:We conduct experiments using event-driven
simulation on a validated simulator. Expert selection traces
are collected by deploying SGLang [51] on an 8×H100 DGX
server and an 8×H200 AWS instance.
We developed a custom multi-chiplet GPU simulator in
Python, as existing tools are inadequate for our needs. Cycle-
accurate simulators such as Gem5 [52], gpgpusim [53], and
mgpusim [54] accurately model single GPUs but are pro-
hibitively slow for large-scale systems with 20+ dies and
batch sizes exceeding 15,000. Event-driven simulators such
as ASTRA-sim [55] support multi-GPU systems but lack
detailed microarchitecture modeling and do not support the
single-GPU-like programming model we adopt. Our simulator
models all key multi-chiplet GPU components, including LLC,
HBM, compute units, and D2D links across all dies, with a
central resource manager that captures contention and con-
gestion. We validated the simulator against real measurements
from an 8×H100 DGX server, as detailed in subsection V-B.
Metric:We measure the throughput of MoE layers during
the decode stage as modern LLM serving systems show a trend
toward fine-granularity disaggregation. Traditional LLMs ben-
efit from separating prefill and decode stages across different
machines, as demonstrated by DistServe [56] and subsequent
works [57], [58]. For MoE models, this disaggregation extends
further. MegaScale-Infer [15] separates attention and MoE
operations onto different machines for optimal batch sizes.
Following this trend, we focus on optimizing MoE operations
during the decode stage.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
DeepSeek-V3
1
3.4
7.9 7.98.1
1
3.3
5.6 6.36.6
1
2.73.1 3.83.9
Kimi-K2
1
3.7
8.2 8.28.3
1
3.6
6.9 7.37.6
1
3.24.3
5.55.8
Llama-4-Maverick
1
2.8
6.2 6.56.7
1
2.8
5.4 6.46.8
1
2.53.3
4.85.8
Qwen3-235B
1
2.73.7 4.85.4
1
2.32.4 3.33.5
1 1.41.52.02.1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1
3.7
10.2 10.310.3
1
3.7
7.2 8.18.4
1
3.13.9 4.85.0
1
4.0
10.4 10.410.5
1
4.0
8.7 9.29.6
1
3.6
5.4
6.97.2
1
3.1
7.8 8.48.5
1
3.2
7.0 8.18.5
1
2.9
4.2
6.0
7.2
1
3.0
5.0
6.26.9
1
2.73.2 4.24.5
1 1.81.82.42.6
100
101
102
103
1
4.4
186.8
189.3
1
4.5
105.6
168.9
1
4.5
12.5
91.9
1
4.7
226.6
227.5
1
4.8
184.4
203.0
1
4.8
50.1
149.6
1
4.0
342.8
414.1
1
4.4
272.4
336.1
1
4.4
125.4
261.7
1
3.8
42.5
171.5
1
4.3
12.1
106.1
1
4.5
4.7
75.4
4096 8192 16384
100
101
102
103
1
4.6
209.6
212.4
1
4.6
117.4
189.9
1
4.6
13.8
103.0
4096 8192 16384
1
4.9
254.9
256.1
1
5.0
209.0
229.2
1
5.0
57.1
170.1
4096 8192 16384
1
4.2
410.9
479.9
1
4.5
319.4
384.4
1
4.6
142.0
299.6
4096 8192 16384
1
4.0
46.8
192.9
1
4.4
13.3
117.7
1
4.6
5.2
83.7
5×5 Wafer8×3 Wafer5×5 Wafer8×3 Wafer
ThroughputHop Reduction
Base(w/o proposed HW) EP (w/ proposed HW) Pred Only (w/ proposed HW) Allo Only (w/ proposed HW) Allo+Pred (w/ proposed HW)
Base(w/o proposed HW) EP (w/ proposed HW) Pred Only (w/ proposed HW) Allo Only (w/ proposed HW) Allo+Pred (w/ proposed HW)
Figure 12. Throughput of MoE layers (Top) and hop number reduction ratio (Bottom). All figures are scaled to baseline.
Table I
HARDWARECONFIGURATIONS
X-die Y-die DRAM
BW
D2D
BW DRAM Cmpt Power
per Die (FP16)
Dojo 5 5 3.35 TB/s 1.7 TB/s 80GB 989 TFLOPS
TSMC-SoW 3 8 3.35 TB/s 1.7 TB/s 80GB 989 TFLOPS
Dojo-Enhanced 5 5 8 TB/s 2 TB/s 180GB 4500 TFLOPS
Other Params
LLC hit latency: 100ns, LLC miss penalty: 110ns,
LLC write latency: 30ns, LLC size: 64 MB
D2D link latency: 200ns, Routing Alg: XY routing,
Command and address size for each remote request: 16B
Loca HBM access latency: 300 ns
Hardware Configuration:We evaluate two multi-chiplet
topologies: Tesla Dojo [59], [60] and the TSMC SoW
roadmap [61]. As summarized in Table I, Dojo uses a 5×5
2D mesh, while TSMC SoW adopts an 8×3 2D mesh. These
choices reflect a deployed system (Dojo) and near-future
industry support (TSMC SoW).
For both the Dojo and TSMC SoW configurations, each
chiplet is H100-like, providing 1,000 TFLOPS FP16 compute,
80GB HBM, 3.35TB/s local HBM bandwidth, and 1.7 TB/s
inter-die bandwidth to adjacent chiplets. We also include
an extended experiment in subsection V-F with a Dojo-
Enhanced configuration, where each die is B300-like to reflect
an anticipated hardware performance trend in the future. We
reserve 10% of DRAM for system and hardware management.
Baseline Configurations:We compare our approach
against the simple strategy currently used by GPU.
TheBaseconfiguration adopts an EP-like data placement
and assigns an equal number of experts to each die. How-
ever, the entire wafer operates as a single large GPU: each
die handles the same amount of expert computation without
considering expert placement.
EPassigns each expert’s computation to the die where
it resides, as also adopted by MoEntwine [45]. This elimi-
nates all D2D communication but can cause severe workload
imbalance. Note that even under EP, our Global CP and
Local CP architecture remains necessary, as expert placement
information is still required.
We implement three variants:Allo Onlyuses solely our task
allocation strategy;Pred Onlyincludes only the data-driven
predictor; andAllo+Predcombines both techniques. These
configurations evaluate the individual and combined effects of
our proposed methods.
Models and Workloads:We conduct evaluations with real
traces collected from Qwen3 and Deepseek V3. The traces are
gathered from diverse datasets, including MMLU [35], MMLU
Pro [36], ChineseSimpleQA [62], and LiveCodeBench [63],
comprising over 24,000 requests per model. Each test batch is
filled by sequentially adding requests in the order of MMLU,
MMLU-Pro (CH), ChineseSimpleQA, and LiveCodeBench
until the target batch size is reached.
B. Validation of Simulator
We validate our simulator using real measurements from an
8×H100 DGX server. We evaluate both single-GPU execution
and two-GPU peer-to-peer (P2P) communication.
For single-GPU execution, we benchmark one expert in a
MoE layer, which consists of three GEMM operations, across
varying batch sizes for both DeepSeek and Qwen.
For P2P communication, we measure data migration be-
tween two GPUs over payload sizes ranging from 4 KB
to 4 GB. To ensure simulation fidelity, we calibrate key
parameters to fit the measured data. As shown in Figure 13,
the simulator’s error remains within 5% for all test cases.
00.511.5
16326412825651210242048307240965120614471688192
MoE Time(ms)
0150300450
4 KB16KB64 KB256 KB1 MB4 MB16 MB64 MB256 MB1 GB4 GB
ActualBW(GB/s) Data Block Size
Measurements of H100 DGXReported by Our Simulator
Qwen 3Deepseek V3
Figure 13. Simulator validation with real data generated from 8xH100 DGX,
including both MoE Layer (Top) and P2P data transfer (Bottom) test cases.
C. Throughput
We evaluate MoE decode stage throughput in Figure 12,
with results normalized to the baseline configuration.
Comparison across models:Our Allo+Pred strategy
achieves 7.0×, 8.2×, 7.3×, and 4.1×throughput improvement
on Deepseek, Kimi, Llama, and Qwen, respectively. Deepseek
and Kimi benefit more due to their larger expert count (256
vs. 128) and more complex selection patterns.
Comparison across chiplet architectures:Our strategy
shows 6.0×improvement on Dojo and 7.5×on TSMC,
despite similar die counts (25 vs. 24). TSMC’s rectangular
layout places dies farther apart, introducing more inter-unit
communication without strategic task allocation, hence the
larger gain under our strategy.
Comparison with EP:At small batch sizes such as 4096,
our strategy and EP perform similarly: few tokens per expert
make execution memory-bound, so splitting one expert across
multiple dies offers no benefit, and our strategy degenerates to
EP. The advantage emerges at larger batches, achieving 1.44×
speedup over EP at batch size 16,384.
D. Hop Reduction
We report hop counts in Figure 12 to show the reduction in
inter-unit communication. Hop count is the sum of Manhattan
distances for all cross-unit communications. Higher hop counts
indicate frequent cross-die data movement. We normalize
results to baseline and report hop reduction ratios, where a
ratio of 10 means the hop count is reduced to 1/10.
Pred Onlyreduces hop counts by 4.5×, aligning with
performance improvement of 3.0×. This indicates cross-unit
communication is the primary bottleneck in baseline, and
reducing hop counts proportionally improves performance.
Allo Onlyreduces hop counts by 142×, exceeding the
performance improvement of 6.3×. This shows that with our
allocation algorithm, inter-unit communication is no longer
the sole bottleneck. While reducing hop counts still improves
performance, the improvement is not proportional.
Allo+Predreduces hop counts by over 213×compared to
baseline. However, performance improvement is only 6.63×
over baseline, with just 1.1×average improvement over Allo
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Base
Pred Only
Allo Only
Allo+Pred
DRAM Access (GB)
Lcal RdRmt RdLcal Wt
18000
18500
19000
19500
Figure 14. DRAM access breakdown for
Qwen3 on TSMC-SoW Configuration with
batch size 4096.
0%10%20%30%40%50%
DS V3 (256)DS V3 (8192)Qwen3 (256)Qwen3 (8192)
Overhead
DojoDojo-Enhanced
Figure 15. Host CPU imple-
mentation overhead under vary-
ing models and batch sizes.
Only. This demonstrates that hop count is no longer a per-
formance bottleneck. With the help of our task allocation
algorithm, most tasks are distributed to local dies holding
related experts, with only extremely popular experts requiring
remote allocation. This leads to minimal D2D traffic and shifts
the bottleneck to workload distribution.
E. DRAM Access Breakdown
We provide a breakdown of DRAM access patterns in
Figure 14 to show how our strategies reduce inter-unit com-
munication. We categorize DRAM access into three types:
reads from local dies, reads from remote dies, and writes to
local dies, where writes to local dies only occur when we
duplicate a remote expert locally. Most reads in the baseline
are from remote dies, resulting in high inter-unit traffic and
poor performance. With our strategies (Pred Only, Allo Only,
and Allo+Pred), most remote DRAM reads are converted to
local DRAM reads, significantly reducing traffic. Compared
with Pred Only, Allo+Pred achieves fewer remote reads by
allocating most tasks to local dies, with only extremely popular
experts requiring computation across multiple dies. Compared
with Allo Only, Allo+Pred further reduces remote reads by
caching popular experts in local HBM.
F . Comparison with Host CPU-Based Implementation
Our task allocation algorithm runs on a new GPU command
processor, but it could, in principle, be executed on the host
CPU with a higher overhead. As shown in Figure 15, we
evaluate both the Dojo and Dojo-Enhanced configurations.
In Dojo, the overhead of host-CPU allocation is 5.2%–6.4%
for DeepSeek V3 and 11.1%–14.2% for Qwen3. In Dojo-
Enhanced, the overhead rises to 19.3%–23.8% for DeepSeek
V3 and 42.0%–51.6% for Qwen3.
DeepSeek vs Qwen:Qwen3 incurs higher overhead than
DeepSeek V3 due to CPU–GPU data transfers over PCIe,
which occur once per MoE layer. The CPU needs the Expert
Distribution Table from the GPU to run the allocator, and
the allocation results must be sent back to the GPU before
kernel execution. Qwen3 has (i) more MoE layers (94 vs.
58), increasing transfer frequency, and (ii) smaller per-layer
compute, which amplifies the relative cost of transfers.
E0 E3
E4 E5 E6 E7
E7
E4 E5 E6
GPU 0
GPU 1
Default Remap-Based Dup-Based
> > >Expert Popularity: 
Remap
Extra-Slots
E2E1 E0 E2
E1
E3 E0 E3
E4 E5 E6 E7
E2E1 E7
Figure 16. Demonstration of expert placement strategies.
Dojo vs Dojo-Enhanced:Dojo-Enhanced shows over 3.7×
higher overhead than Dojo because its GPU dies are sig-
nificantly faster, making fixed PCIe transfer costs dominate
more. As GPU performance outpaces interconnect bandwidth,
implementing the allocator in the GPU command processor
becomes increasingly necessary to sustain performance.
G. Area and Power Overhead
We estimate the area and power overhead of all added mod-
ules in Table II. Our design supports up to 100 layers with 512
experts per layer, well beyond SOTA MoE model (Kimi-K2:
61 layers, 384 experts). The full heatmap (50 MB) is stored in
Global CP DRAM, with a 0.5 MB on-chip cache buffering
one layer at a time. The Prediction Table is implemented
in registers due to its small size; all other components use
SRAM. Registers are synthesized with Yosys [64] and SRAM
is modeled with CACTI [65], both scaled to 5 nm to match
the H100 process node. Global and Local CP area estimates
are derived from ARM core data. As shown in Table II, total
area and power overhead is less than 0.04%.
Table II
AREA ANDPOWEROVERHEAD.
Capacity Bit
Width
Num
Per Wafer
Tot Area
(mm2)
Tot Power
(mW)
Prediction Table 128 B 16 bit 25 0.0020 55.75
Address Translation Unit 4.25 KB 68 bit 25 0.0048 334.25
Local CP (A72) [66] N/A N/A 25∼7.5000∼7000
Expert Distribution Table 4.5 KB 72 bit 1 0.0002 13.94
Heatmap Cache 0.5 MB 512 bit 1 0.0278 184.67
Global CP (A76) [67] N/A N/A 1∼1.1000∼1000
Total 6.13 8588.61
Overhead (25-die wafer)∼0.04%∼0.04%
VI. CASESTUDY2: PREFILL-GUIDEDDECODEEXPERT
PLACEMENT ONREALGPU CLUSTERS
A. Introduction
Workload imbalance is one of the biggest challenges in
large-scale MoE serving (200+ GPUs). EPLB [68] addresses
this by dynamically adjusting expert placement, but it is
triggered every 3000+ steps and relies on periodically collected
profiling data [69]. A natural question then arises: how to set
expert placement for the initial∼1000 decode tokens when no
profiling data are yet available? This is especially pressing for
short-output requests, for which EPLB never collects enough
data to be effective. Inspired by Insight 1 , which reveals
temporal correlation between prefill and decode stages, we
propose leveraging prefill-stage expert selection information
to guide expert placement for initial decode steps.
Algorithm 2:Prefill-Guided Expert Placement
Input:Prefill tracesD, GPU countG, extra slots per GPUR
Output:Per-layer expert-to-GPU assignment{S g}G
g=1
1Notation:E: total experts;f l,e: freq of experteat layerl;L g: load
of GPUg;r g: remaining slots on GPUg;δ e,g:max g′ Lg′
change after copying experteto GPUg
2Functionremap_based_placement(D, G):
3foreach layerldo
4Computef l,e fromD; sort exps by decreasingCost(f l,e);
5L g ←0for allg;
6foreach expertein sorted orderdo
7Assigneto least-loaded GPUg ∗ s.t.|S g∗ |< E/G;
Lg∗ += Cost(f l,e);
8return{S g}for each layer;
9Functiondup_based_placement(D, G, R):
10foreach layerldo
11Computef l,e fromD; generate default placementS g;
12r g ←Rfor allg;
13L g ← P
e∈Sg Cost(fl,e)for allg;
14fori←1toR·Gdo
15(e ∗, g∗)←arg min e,g:r g >0, g /∈hosts(e)δe,g;
16Assigne ∗ toS g∗ ;r g∗ ←r g∗ −1;
17update affectedL g;
18return{S g}for each layer;
As shown in Figure 16, we design two placement algorithms
(details in algorithm 2). TheRemap-basedalgorithm keeps the
number of experts per GPU unchanged and reassigns experts
across GPUs for a more balanced workload: it sorts experts by
decreasing roofline cost and greedily assigns each to the least-
loaded GPU, subject to a uniform capacity ofE/Gexperts per
GPU. TheDuplication-basedalgorithm reserves extra expert
slots on each GPU and uses prefill traces to duplicate hot
experts, thereby avoiding congestion: starting from the default
contiguous layout (e.g., experts 0–15 on GPU,0, 16–31 on
GPU,1, etc.), it greedily adds up toRextra replicas per GPU,
selecting at each step the (expert, GPU) pair that maximally
reduces the bottleneck loadmax g loadg; tokens of a replicated
expert are evenly split among all its copies. Both algorithms
use a roofline-based cost model to estimate per-GPU load.
B. Methodology
We deploy Qwen3-235B with SGLang on 8×H100 GPUs
with NVLink. We build a distributed profiler by insert-
ingcuda.Eventtimers into SGLang to measure indi-
vidual operations (attention, top-k, all-to-all, and MoE) on
each GPU independently. We manipulate expert placement
through SGLang’sinit_expert_locationinterface and
useDeepEPas the MoE backend. Theep_dispatch_-
algorithmis set to “dynamic” so that tokens are evenly
distributed across replicas of a duplicated expert.
Metric.We report MoE computation time, i.e., all three
expert linear layers, excluding attention, all-to-all, and top-k.
Model and Benchmark.We evaluate on Qwen3-235B (94
MoE layers, 128 experts per layer, 8 selected). We use MMLU
and Global-MMLU datasets, following the original ordering.
Batch sizes range from 64 to 16,384.
4K 8K 16K 24K
Batch Size
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5MoE Speedup
0.80
1.00
1.221.251.33
0.56
1.00 1.041.141.20
0.51
1.00 1.041.11
1.25
0.57
1.00
1.121.201.28
Default Worst Best Remap(Ours) Dup(Ours)
Figure 17. Performance of our prefill-aware expert placement.
Baselines.Defaultis the standard contiguous placement
used by Qwen and SGLang (experts 0–15 on GPU-0, 16–
31 on GPU-1, etc.).BestandWorstare the theoretically
optimal and worst placements generated with oracle decode-
stage selections (not available in practice).RemapandDup
are our two prefill-guided strategies. For Dup, we use one extra
slot per GPU, yielding 128+8=136 experts per layer.
C. Results
As shown in Figure 17,RemapandDupachieve speedups
of 15.5% and 12.5% overDefault, respectively, and deliver
over 2×speedup compared withWorst. Both remain within
10% ofBest, which exploits oracle decode-stage information
unavailable in practice, which demonstrates the effectiveness
of our approach. Since the two algorithms perform compara-
bly, one can choose between them to fit different memory and
system constraints.
We note that our 8-GPU EP scale inherently limits the
achievable improvement: with EP8, each GPU holds 16 ex-
perts per layer, so every GPU likely contains a mix of hot and
cold experts, naturally yielding a relatively balanced workload
even under theDefaultlayout (the max/min execution-time
ratio is only about 1.3×). We expect greater speedups at larger
EP scales where load imbalance is more pronounced.
VII. DISCUSSION
Both the wafer-scale GPU architecture and the prefill-guided
expert placement strategy serve as case studies demonstrating
the practical applicability of our profiling insights, which
constitute the paper’s primary contribution. Specifically, the
wafer-scale GPU design follows Insight 3 for task allocation
and leverages temporal relation insights (Insight 1 and part of
Insight 2) to build a data-driven predictor. The prefill-guided
placement strategy utilizes Insight 1 to guide decode-stage
expert placement using information collected during prefill.
Importantly, our insights extend far beyond these two case
studies and can benefit a wide range of MoE serving systems,
including multi-GPU clusters (Multi-Node DGX [9], [15],
[70] and NVL72 [71]), CXL-/CPU-based memory disaggrega-
tion [12], [31], flash-based multi-tier systems [72], [73], PIM
architectures [33], [74], [75], and other emerging platforms.
VIII. RELATEDWORK
MoE model behavior studies:Several MoE model tech
reports [76]–[79] provide the MoE routing patterns as part of
their evaluation. For example, the Mixtral report [77] shows
the temporal locality of expert selection by reporting the
percentage of repetitive assignment. The OLMoE report [76]
shows the co-activation pattern and domain specialization
among the experts. A blog post from SGLang [28] shows
expert distribution statistics for the DeepSeekV3 model and
the inherent imbalance in expert selection and similarity be-
tween prefill and decode. None of these studies provides a
comprehensive profiling across multiple large-scale (>200B)
MoE models, nor do they present a data-movement-centric
methodology to highlight the opportunities like this paper.
Data movement optimization for MoE LLM inference
Various prior works [9], [16], [31], [33], [80]–[87] have
focused on improving the efficiency of MoE LLM infer-
ence by reducing data movement. For example, Lina and
SmartMoE [81], [88] exploit expert selection skewness to
dynamically schedule resources during inference and balance
traffic across GPUs. LYNX [82] dynamically reduces active
experts while preserving model accuracy. Pre-gate MoE [80]
uses a pre-gating function to alleviate the dynamic nature of
expert selection. Sida [85] builds an offline hash function to
predict expert usage and reduce data movement between CPU
and GPU. MoE-Lightning [31] leverages a CPU-GPU pipeline
and paged weights to improve resource utilization. Eliseev and
Mazur [84] exploit expert locality and leverage LRU caching
to manage GPU and CPU memory. This work targets data
movement reduction in MoE LLM inference. Our cross-model
profiling reveals optimization principles that apply broadly to
current and future systems regardless of scale.
Wafer-Scale and Chiplet ArchitecturesAs single-chip scal-
ing slows, wafer-scale and chiplet packaging offer promising
paths for improved compute efficiency. Prior work targets
either interconnect design [89]–[95] or data placement for spe-
cific algorithms [25], [96] and applications [26], [97], [98]. In
contrast, we are the first to study MoE LLM serving on wafer-
scale GPUs and propose data-movement-centric HW/SW co-
design optimizations.
IX. CONCLUSION
Unlike prior MoE serving studies that take system-centric
approaches with deployment-specific strategies, we study MoE
serving from a model-focused perspective. We conduct com-
prehensive data-movement-centric profiling of state-of-the-
art MoE models (200B–1000B) to extract system-agnostic
insights, revealing structured patterns underlying seemingly
random data movement and providing actionable guidance on
system design. We validate these insights on both a future
wafer-scale GPU architecture and existing multi-GPU sys-
tems, achieving significant performance improvements through
minimal architectural modifications and lightweight software
design, demonstrating their broad applicability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank all reviewers for their constructive feedback and
insightful suggestions. This work is partially supported by
Samsung Semiconductor.
ARTIFACTAPPENDIX
A.1 Abstract
This artifact packages the code, traces, scripts, and plotting
utilities for reproducing the paper’s main results across the
two case studies.
Case Study 1is a CPU-runnable wafer-scale GPU simulator
for MoE inference. It evaluates our expert allocation and
prediction strategies across four large-scale MoE models and
two chiplet topologies, reproducing Figure 12.
Case Study 2contains the real-GPU expert placement
experiments and reproduces Figure 17 on an 8×H100 system.
It requires a specialized GPU software stack. Both artifacts
provide amain_ae.pyworkflow for downloading traces,
running experiments, and generating figures.
A.2 Artifact Check-List
Program:Python 3.
Run-time environment:Linux with Python≥3.10.
Hardware:Case Study 1 requires a CPU server with≥64 GB
RAM. Case Study 2 requires an 8×NVIDIA H100 80 GB GPU
server.
Output:Paper figures and CSV result files.
Disk space:About 80 GB for one model and up to 300 GB
for all four models.
Experiment time:Case Study 1 takes 8–12 hours for one
model or 18–36 hours for all models. Case Study 2 takes 12–
16 hours.
Publicly available:Yes.
Code license:Apache-2.0.
A.3 Description
A.3.1 How to Access:Case Study 1 (wafer-scale GPU
simulator):GitHub:waferscale_gpu_moe_sim; DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.19617713.
Case Study 2 (real-GPU expert placement):GitHub:
moe_exp_placement; DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.19617695.
Each repository contains aREADME.mdwith setup, exe-
cution, and troubleshooting instructions. The Zenodo archives
provide persistent snapshots of the evaluated artifact versions.
A.3.2 Hardware Dependencies:Case Study 1 runs on a
CPU server with at least 64 GB RAM and does not require a
GPU. Case Study 2 requires an 8×NVIDIA H100 80 GB GPU
server, CUDA 12.0 or newer, and about 300 GB of disk space.
Reviewers without GPU access can still evaluate the primary
simulator artifact.
A.3.3 Software Dependencies:Case Study 1 requires
Python≥3.10 plusnumpy,pandas, andmatplotlib;
the scripts install them automatically. Case Study 2 addi-
tionally requires PyTorch, a modified SGLang fork, DeepEP,
and DeepGEMM. The repository documents exact installation
commands and environment settings.
A.3.4 Datasets:Both artifacts use pre-recorded MoE
expert-selection traces from MMLU. The traces are hosted on
HuggingFace and downloaded automatically by the AE scripts.
A.4 Installation
Installation instructions are provided in each repository’s
README.md. Case Study 1 is self-contained and intended as
the default AE path. Case Study 2 includes GPU stack and
communication library setup.
A.5 Experiment Workflow
Both repositories provide amain_ae.pyentry point. The
script downloads traces, runs experiments, collects CSV files,
and regenerates the corresponding paper figure. Reviewers
may also run individual model configurations using the repos-
itoryREADME.mdcommands.
A.6 Evaluation and Expected Results
Case Study 1 reproduces Figure 12. The simulator is deter-
ministic, so generated results should match the reported trends
when using the same traces and configuration files.
Case Study 2 reproduces Figure 17. Because it measures
real GPU execution, small timing variations are expected from
thermals, system load, NCCL non-determinism, and SGLang
micro-batching. In our runs, variation is typically within
±5%. The high-level result is stable: prefill-aware placement
improves MoE kernel performance by about 5–25% over the
default placement.
A.7 Methodology
Submission, reviewing, and badging follow the ACM arti-
fact review guidelines and the cTuning AE guidelines.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Nam, A. Macvean, V . Hellendoorn, B. Vasilescu, and B. Myers,
“Using an llm to help with code understanding,” inProceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering, ser.
ICSE ’24, 2024.
[2] Y . Wang, W. Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. H. Hoi, “Codet5: Identifier-aware
unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and
generation,”arXiv, 2021.
[3] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkatet al., “Gpt-4
technical report,”arXiv, 2023.
[4] Y . Lu, W. Zhu, L. Li, Y . Qiao, and F. Yuan, “Llamax: Scaling linguis-
tic horizons of llm by enhancing translation capabilities beyond 100
languages,”arXiv, 2024.
[5] S. K. Dam, C. S. Hong, Y . Qiao, and C. Zhang, “A complete survey on
llm-based ai chatbots,”arXiv, 2024.
[6] S. Vakayil, D. S. Juliet, S. Vakayilet al., “Rag-based llm chatbot using
llama-2,” in2024 7th International Conference on Devices, Circuits and
Systems (ICDCS), 2024.
[7] W.-L. Chiang, L. Zheng, Y . Sheng, A. N. Angelopoulos, T. Li, D. Li,
B. Zhu, H. Zhang, M. Jordan, J. E. Gonzalezet al., “Chatbot arena: An
open platform for evaluating llms by human preference,” inForty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[8] S. Go and D. Mahajan, “Moetuner: Optimized mixture of expert serving
with balanced expert placement and token routing,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.06643, 2025.
[9] S. Zhang, N. Zheng, H. Lin, Z. Jiang, W. Bao, C. Jiang, Q. Hou, W. Cui,
S. Zheng, L.-W. Chang, Q. Chen, and X. Liu, “COMET: Fine-grained
computation-communication overlapping for mixture-of-experts,” in
Eighth Conference on Machine Learning and Systems, 2025. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=fGgQS5VW09
[10] DeepSeek-AI, “DeepSeek-V4: Towards highly efficient million-token
context intelligence,” Technical report, 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V4-Flash
[11] GLM-5 Team, A. Zeng, X. Lv, Z. Hou, Z. Du, Q. Zheng, B. Chen,
D. Yinet al., “GLM-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.15763, 2026.
[12] Z. Fang, Y . Huang, Z. Hong, Y . Lyu, W. Chen, Y . Yu, F. Yu, and
Z. Zheng, “Klotski: Efficient mixture-of-expert inference via expert-
aware multi-batch pipeline,” inProceedings of the 30th ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2, 2025.
[13] S. Tairin, S. Mahmud, H. Shen, and A. Iyer, “emoe: Task-aware mem-
ory efficient mixture-of-experts-based (moe) model inference,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.06823, 2025.
[14] J. Yao, Q. Anthony, A. Shafi, H. Subramoni, and D. K. D. Panda,
“Exploiting inter-layer expert affinity for accelerating mixture-of-experts
model inference,” in2024 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed
Processing Symposium (IPDPS). IEEE, 2024.
[15] R. Zhu, Z. Jiang, C. Jin, P. Wu, C. A. Stuardo, D. Wang, X. Zhang,
H. Zhou, H. Wei, Y . Chenget al., “Megascale-infer: Serving mixture-
of-experts at scale with disaggregated expert parallelism,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.02263, 2025.
[16] A. Skliar, T. van Rozendaal, R. Lepert, T. Boinovski, M. Van Baalen,
M. Nagel, P. Whatmough, and B. E. Bejnordi, “Mixture of cache-
conditional experts for efficient mobile device inference,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.00099, 2024.
[17] K. T. Chitty-Venkata, S. Madireddy, M. Emani, and V . Vishwanath,
“Lexi: Layer-adaptive active experts for efficient moe model inference,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02753, 2025.
[18] A. Liu, B. Feng, B. Xue, B. Wang, B. Wu, C. Lu, C. Zhao, C. Deng,
C. Zhang, C. Ruanet al., “Deepseek-v3 technical report,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
[19] Meta. (2025) Llama4 technical report. [Online]. Available: https:
//ai.meta.com/blog/llama-4-multimodal-intelligence/
[20] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao,
C. Huang, C. Lvet al., “Qwen3 technical report,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[21] K. Team, Y . Bai, Y . Bao, G. Chen, J. Chen, N. Chen, R. Chen, Y . Chen,
Y . Chen, Y . Chenet al., “Kimi k2: Open agentic intelligence,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.20534, 2025.
[22] A. Smith, G. H. Loh, J. Wuu, S. Naffziger, T. Huang, H. McIntyre,
R. Mangaser, W. Jung, and R. Swaminathan, “Amd instinct™ mi300x
accelerator: Packaging and architecture co-optimization,” in2024 IEEE
Symposium on VLSI Technology and Circuits (VLSI Technology and
Circuits). IEEE, 2024.
[23] P. Dalmia, R. S. Kumar, and M. D. Sinclair, “Cpelide: Efficient multi-
chiplet gpu implicit synchronization,” in2024 57th IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2024.
[24] NVIDIA, “Nvidia blackwell architecture overview,” https://resources.
nvidia.com/en-us-blackwell-architecture, 2025.
[25] C. He, Y . Huang, P. Mu, Z. Miao, J. Xue, L. Ma, F. Yang, and L. Mai,
“Waferllm: Large language model inference at wafer scale,” in19th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 25). USENIX Association, 2025.
[26] Z. Xu, D. Kong, J. Liu, J. Li, J. Hou, X. Dai, C. Li, S. Wei, Y . Hu, and
S. Yin, “Wsc-llm: Efficient llm service and architecture co-exploration
for wafer-scale chips,” inProceedings of the 52nd Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2025, pp. 1–17.
[27] S. T. from LMSYS Org. (2025) Together with sglang: Best
practices for serving deepseek-r1 on h20-96g. [Online]. Available:
https://lmsys.org/blog/2025-09-26-sglang-ant-group/
[28] ——. (2025) Deploying deepseek with pd disaggregation and large-
scale expert parallelism on 96 h100 gpus. [Online]. Available:
https://lmsys.org/blog/2025-05-05-large-scale-ep/
[29] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2017.
[30] S. Masoudnia and R. Ebrahimpour, “Mixture of experts: a literature
survey,”Artificial Intelligence Review, pp. 275–293, 2014.
[31] S. Cao, S. Liu, T. Griggs, P. Schafhalter, X. Liu, Y . Sheng, J. E. Gon-
zalez, M. Zaharia, and I. Stoica, “Moe-lightning: High-throughput moe
inference on memory-constrained gpus,” inProceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, 2025.
[32] J. Suo, X. Liao, L. Xiao, L. Ruan, J. Wang, X. Su, and Z. Huo, “Coserve:
Efficient collaboration-of-experts (coe) model inference with limited
memory,” inProceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, 2025.
[33] S. Yun, K. Kyung, J. Cho, J. Choi, J. Kim, B. Kim, S. Lee, K. Sohn,
and J. H. Ahn, “Duplex: A device for large language models with
mixture of experts, grouped query attention, and continuous batching,”
in2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO), 2024.
[34] P. Schober, C. Boer, and L. A. Schwarte, “Correlation coefficients:
appropriate use and interpretation,”Anesthesia & analgesia, 2018.
[35] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and
J. Steinhardt, “Measuring massive multitask language understanding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
[36] Y . Wang, X. Ma, G. Zhang, Y . Ni, A. Chandra, S. Guo, W. Ren,
A. Arulraj, X. He, Z. Jianget al., “Mmlu-pro: A more robust and
challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark,”Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[37] M. Lundstrom, “Moore’s law forever?”Science, 2003.
[38] Y .-C. Hu, Y .-M. Liang, H.-P. Hu, C.-Y . Tan, C.-T. Shen, C.-H. Lee, and
S. Hou, “Cowos architecture evolution for next generation hpc on 2.5
d system in package,” in2023 IEEE 73rd Electronic Components and
Technology Conference (ECTC), 2023.
[39] J. Shin, H. Eslampour, S. Jeong, W. Kim, S. Yong, S.-O. Ahn, E. Park,
and S. Song, “Signal integrity of die-to-die interface with advanced
packages for co-packaged optics,” in2024 IEEE 33rd Conference on
Electrical Performance of Electronic Packaging and Systems (EPEPS),
2024.
[40] R. Mahajan, R. Sankman, N. Patel, D.-W. Kim, K. Aygun, Z. Qian,
Y . Mekonnen, I. Salama, S. Sharan, D. Iyengaret al., “Embedded
multi-die interconnect bridge (emib)–a high density, high bandwidth
packaging interconnect,” in2016 IEEE 66th Electronic Components and
Technology Conference (ECTC), 2016.
[41] NVIDIA, “Nvidia gtc 2025,” https://www.nvidia.com/gtc/, 2025.
[42] S. Hou, W. C. Chen, C. Hu, C. Chiu, K. Ting, T. Lin, W. Wei, W. Chiou,
V . J. Lin, V . C. Changet al., “Wafer-level integration of an advanced
logic-memory system through the second-generation cowos technology,”
IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 2017.
[43] P.-C. Shih, A.-J. Su, K.-H. Tam, T.-C. Huang, K. Chuang, and J. Yeh,
“Sow-x: A novel system-on-wafer technology for next generation ai
server application,” in2025 IEEE 75th Electronic Components and
Technology Conference (ECTC). IEEE, 2025.
[44] S. Hou, H. Hsia, C. Tsai, K. Ting, T. Yu, Y . Lee, F. Chen, W. Chiou,
C. Wang, C. Wuet al., “Integrated deep trench capacitor in si inter-
poser for cowos heterogeneous integration,” in2019 IEEE International
Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM). IEEE, 2019, pp. 19–5.
[45] X. Tang, J. Hou, D. Jiang, T. Wei, J. Liu, J. Deng, H. Wang, Q. Yang,
H. Shang, C. Liet al., “Moentwine: Unleashing the potential of wafer-
scale chips for large-scale expert parallel inference,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.25258, 2025.
[46] M. Joshi, B. Joo, Z. Susskind, A. Hendriksen, and K. Clark. (2026)
Accelerating data processing with NVIDIA multi-instance GPU and
NUMA node localization. NVIDIA Technical Blog. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-data-processing-
with-nvidia-multi-instance-gpu-and-numa-node-localization/
[47] D. Xu, Y . Li, Y . Sun, J. Ren, and Y . Sun, “Hdpat: Hierarchical
distributed page address translation for wafer-scale gpus,” in2026 IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), 2026.
[48] Z. Huang, S. Fan, C. Tang, X. Lin, S. Deng, and Y . Liu, “Hecaton:
Training large language models with scalable chiplet systems,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.05784, 2024.
[49] M. LeBeane, K. Hamidouche, B. Benton, M. Breternitz, S. K. Reinhardt,
and L. K. John, “Comp-net: Command processor networking for efficient
intra-kernel communications on gpus,” inProceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation
Techniques, 2018.
[50] A. Gutierrez, B. M. Beckmann, A. Dutu, J. Gross, M. LeBeane, J. Kala-
matianos, O. Kayiran, M. Poremba, B. Potter, S. Puthooret al., “Lost
in abstraction: Pitfalls of analyzing gpus at the intermediate language
level,” in2018 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2018.
[51] L. Zheng, L. Yin, Z. Xie, C. L. Sun, J. Huang, C. H. Yu, S. Cao,
C. Kozyrakis, I. Stoica, J. E. Gonzalezet al., “Sglang: Efficient execution
of structured language model programs,”Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2024.
[52] N. Binkert, B. Beckmann, G. Black, S. K. Reinhardt, A. Saidi, A. Basu,
J. Hestness, D. R. Hower, T. Krishna, S. Sardashtiet al., “The gem5
simulator,”ACM SIGARCH computer architecture news, 2011.
[53] A. Bakhoda, G. L. Yuan, W. W. Fung, H. Wong, and T. M. Aamodt,
“Analyzing cuda workloads using a detailed gpu simulator,” in2009
IEEE international symposium on performance analysis of systems and
software, 2009.
[54] Y . Sun, T. Baruah, S. A. Mojumder, S. Dong, X. Gong, S. Treadway,
Y . Bao, S. Hance, C. McCardwell, V . Zhaoet al., “Mgpusim: Enabling
multi-gpu performance modeling and optimization,” inProceedings of
the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2019.
[55] W. Won, T. Heo, S. Rashidi, S. Sridharan, S. Srinivasan, and T. Kr-
ishna, “Astra-sim2. 0: Modeling hierarchical networks and disaggregated
systems for large-model training at scale,” in2023 IEEE International
Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS),
2023.
[56] Y . Zhong, S. Liu, J. Chen, J. Hu, Y . Zhu, X. Liu, X. Jin, and
H. Zhang, “{DistServe}: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for
goodput-optimized large language model serving,” in18th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
24), 2024.
[57] B. Wu, S. Liu, Y . Zhong, P. Sun, X. Liu, and X. Jin, “Loongserve: Effi-
ciently serving long-context large language models with elastic sequence
parallelism,” inProceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles, 2024, pp. 640–654.
[58] R. Qin, Z. Li, W. He, J. Cui, F. Ren, M. Zhang, Y . Wu, W. Zheng,
and X. Xu, “Mooncake: Trading more storage for less computation—a
{KVCache-centric}architecture for serving{LLM}chatbot,” in23rd
USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 25), 2025.
[59] E. Talpes, D. D. Sarma, D. Williams, S. Arora, T. Kunjan, B. Floering,
A. Jalote, C. Hsiong, C. Poorna, V . Samantet al., “The microarchitecture
of dojo, tesla’s exa-scale computer,”IEEE Micro, 2023.
[60] E. Talpes, D. Williams, and D. D. Sarma, “Dojo: The microarchitecture
of tesla’s exa-scale computer,” in2022 IEEE Hot Chips 34 Symposium
(HCS), 2022.
[61] TSMC. (2025) Tsmc’s next generation of system-on-
wafer package will make today’s cpus and gpus look
pathetically feeble in comparison. [Online]. Available:
https://www.pcgamer.com/hardware/processors/tsmcs-next-generation-
of-system-on-wafer-packaging-will-make-todays-cpus-and-gpus-look-
pathetically-feeble-in-comparison/
[62] Y . He, S. Li, J. Liu, Y . Tan, W. Wang, H. Huang, X. Bu, H. Guo, C. Hu,
B. Zhenget al., “Chinese simpleqa: A chinese factuality evaluation for
large language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07140, 2024.
[63] N. Jain, K. Han, A. Gu, W.-D. Li, F. Yan, T. Zhang, S. Wang,
A. Solar-Lezama, K. Sen, and I. Stoica, “Livecodebench: Holistic and
contamination free evaluation of large language models for code,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.07974, 2024.
[64] C. Wolf, J. Glaser, and J. Kepler, “Yosys-a free verilog synthesis suite,”
inProceedings of the 21st Austrian Workshop on Microelectronics
(Austrochip), vol. 97, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[65] R. Balasubramonian, A. B. Kahng, N. Muralimanohar, A. Shafiee,
and V . Srinivas, “Cacti 7: New tools for interconnect exploration in
innovative off-chip memories,”ACM Transactions on Architecture and
Code Optimization (TACO), vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–25, 2017.
[66] G. Shan, Y . Zheng, C. Xing, D. Chen, G. Li, and Y . Yang, “Architecture
of computing system based on chiplet,”Micromachines, vol. 13, no. 2,
p. 205, 2022.
[67] K. Wang, J. Chen, Y . Xu, Z. Yu, W. He, D. Tang, N. Sun, and
Y . Bao, “Xiangshan: An open-source project for high-performance risc-v
processors meeting industrial-grade standards,”IEEE Micro, 2025.
[68] deepseek-ai, “Eplb: Expert parallelism load balancer,” 2026, gitHub
repository (Python implementation:eplb.py). [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/deepseek-ai/EPLB
[69] vLLM Team. (2025) Expert parallel deployment — configuration.
VLLM Documentation, version 0.12.0. [Online]. Available: https://docs.
vllm.ai/en/v0.12.0/serving/expert parallel deployment/#configuration 1
[70] C. Chen, M. Li, Z. Wu, D. Yu, and C. Yang, “Ta-moe: Topology-aware
large scale mixture-of-expert training,”Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 22 173–22 186, 2022.
[71] W. Li, J. Peng, Z. Jing, T. Zhang, Z. Long, X. Qiao, X. Chen,
D. Yang, K. Duan, and J. Yang, “Dwdp: Distributed weight data
parallelism for high-performance llm inference on nvl72,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.01621, 2026.
[72] Z. Yu, S. Liang, T. Ma, Y . Cai, Z. Nan, D. Huang, X. Song, Y . Hao,
J. Zhang, T. Zhiet al., “Cambricon-llm: A chiplet-based hybrid archi-
tecture for on-device inference of 70b llm,” in2024 57th IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2024.
[73] Y . Sheng, L. Zheng, B. Yuan, Z. Li, M. Ryabinin, B. Chen, P. Liang,
C. R ´e, I. Stoica, and C. Zhang, “Flexgen: High-throughput generative
inference of large language models with a single gpu,” inInternational
Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
[74] Y . Pan, Z. Xia, P.-K. Hsu, L. Hu, H. Kim, J. Sharda, M. Zhou, N. S. Kim,
S. Yu, T. Rosinget al., “Stratum: System-hardware co-design with tiered
monolithic 3d-stackable dram for efficient moe serving,” inProceedings
of the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture,
2025, pp. 1–17.
[75] Z. Yu, H. Ye, C. Zhou, O. R. Venkatachalam, Z. Pan, Z. Hu, J. Kim,
W. W. Ro, P.-A. Tsai, S. Pei, Y . Kang, and Y . Ding, “Amma: A multi-
chiplet memory-centric architecture for low-latency 1m context attention
serving,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.26103, 2026.
[76] N. Muennighoff, L. Soldaini, D. Groeneveld, K. Lo, J. Morrison, S. Min,
W. Shi, P. Walsh, O. Tafjord, N. Lambertet al., “Olmoe: Open mixture-
of-experts language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02060, 2024.
[77] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Roux, A. Mensch, B. Savary, C. Bam-
ford, D. S. Chaplot, D. d. l. Casas, E. B. Hanna, F. Bressandet al.,
“Mixtral of experts,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
[78] D. Dai, C. Deng, C. Zhao, R. Xu, H. Gao, D. Chen, J. Li, W. Zeng,
X. Yu, Y . Wuet al., “Deepseekmoe: Towards ultimate expert spe-
cialization in mixture-of-experts language models,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.06066, 2024.
[79] X. Sun, Y . Chen, Y . Huang, R. Xie, J. Zhu, K. Zhang, S. Li,
Z. Yang, J. Han, X. Shuet al., “Hunyuan-large: An open-source moe
model with 52 billion activated parameters by tencent,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.02265, 2024.
[80] R. Hwang, J. Wei, S. Cao, C. Hwang, X. Tang, T. Cao, and M. Yang,
“Pre-gated moe: An algorithm-system co-design for fast and scalable
mixture-of-expert inference,” in2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual Interna-
tional Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 2024, pp.
1018–1031.
[81] J. Li, Y . Jiang, Y . Zhu, C. Wang, and H. Xu, “Accelerating distributed
moe training and inference with lina,” in2023 USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (USENIX ATC 23), 2023, pp. 945–959.
[82] V . Gupta, K. Sinha, A. Gavrilovska, and A. P. Iyer, “Lynx: Enabling
efficient moe inference through dynamic batch-aware expert selection,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.08982, 2024.
[83] K. Kamahori, T. Tang, Y . Gu, K. Zhu, and B. Kasikci, “Fiddler:
CPU-GPU orchestration for fast inference of mixture-of-experts
models,” inThe Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=N5fVv6PZGz
[84] A. Eliseev and D. Mazur, “Fast inference of mixture-of-experts language
models with offloading,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17238, 2023.
[85] Z. Du, S. Li, Y . Wu, X. Jiang, J. Sun, Q. Zheng, Y . Wu, A. Li, H. Li,
and Y . Chen, “Sida: Sparsity-inspired data-aware serving for efficient
and scalable large mixture-of-experts models,”Proceedings of Machine
Learning and Systems, vol. 6, pp. 224–238, 2024.
[86] J. Li, S. Tripathi, L. Rastogi, Y . Lei, R. Pan, and Y . Xia, “Optimizing
mixture-of-experts inference time combining model deployment and
communication scheduling,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17043, 2024.
[87] C. Hwang, W. Cui, Y . Xiong, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, H. Hu, Z. Wang, R. Salas,
J. Jose, P. Ramet al., “Tutel: Adaptive mixture-of-experts at scale,”
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, vol. 5, pp. 269–287,
2023.
[88] M. Zhai, J. He, Z. Ma, Z. Zong, R. Zhang, and J. Zhai, “{SmartMoE}:
Efficiently training{Sparsely-Activated}models through combining
offline and online parallelization,” in2023 USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (USENIX ATC 23), 2023, pp. 961–975.
[89] S. Rashidi, W. Won, S. Srinivasan, P. Gupta, and T. Krishna, “Fred: A
wafer-scale fabric for 3d parallel dnn training,” inProceedings of the
52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2025,
pp. 34–48.
[90] Q. Yang, T. Wei, S. Guan, C. Li, H. Shang, J. Deng, H. Wang, C. Li,
L. Wang, Y . Zhanget al., “Pd constraint-aware physical/logical topology
co-design for network on wafer,” inProceedings of the 52nd Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2025, pp. 49–64.
[91] X. Yu, D. Jiang, J. Deng, J. Liu, C. Li, S. Yin, and Y . Hu, “Cramming a
data center into one cabinet, a co-exploration of computing and hardware
architecture of waferscale chip,” inProceedings of the 52nd Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2025, pp. 631–645.
[92] Z. Li and D. Wentzlaff, “Lucie: A universal chiplet-interposer design
framework for plug-and-play integration,” in2024 57th IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 2024,
pp. 423–436.
[93] S. Chen, S. Pal, and R. Kumar, “Waferscale network switches,” in
2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 215–229.
[94] Y . Feng, D. Xiang, and K. Ma, “Heterogeneous die-to-die interfaces:
Enabling more flexible chiplet interconnection systems,” inProceedings
of the 56th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi-
tecture, 2023, pp. 930–943.
[95] ——, “A scalable methodology for designing efficient interconnection
network of chiplets,” in2023 IEEE International Symposium on High-
Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1059–
1071.
[96] Z. Tan, H. Cai, R. Dong, and K. Ma, “Nn-baton: Dnn workload orches-
tration and chiplet granularity exploration for multichip accelerators,”
in2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1013–1026.
[97] Y . S. Shao, J. Clemons, R. Venkatesan, B. Zimmer, M. Fojtik, N. Jiang,
B. Keller, A. Klinefelter, N. Pinckney, P. Rainaet al., “Simba: Scaling
deep-learning inference with multi-chip-module-based architecture,” in
Proceedings of the 52nd annual IEEE/ACM international symposium on
microarchitecture, 2019, pp. 14–27.
[98] M. Odema, L. Chen, H. Kwon, and M. A. Al Faruque, “Scar: Schedul-
ing multi-model ai workloads on heterogeneous multi-chiplet module
accelerators,” in2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 2024, pp. 565–579.